feat(copy_kernel): add basic copy kernel example with beginner friendly documentation (#2582)
ROCm/composable_kernel: example/ck_tile/39_copy/README.md

# CK Tile Framework: Getting Started with Tile Copy Operations

## Overview

### Copy Kernel

> A minimal CK_Tile memory copy implementation demonstrating basic setup required to write a kernel in CK Tile.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A minimal CK_Tile memory copy implementation demonstrating the basic setup required to write a kernel in CK Tile.
```

> This experimental kernel serves the purpose of demonstrating the building blocks of CK Tile for novice developers and a sandbox for experimenting with kernel parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This experimental kernel is intended for novice CK developers. It introduces the building blocks of CK Tile and provides a sandbox for experimenting with kernel parameters.
```

## build
```
# in the root of ck_tile
mkdir build && cd build
# you can replace <arch> with the appropriate architecture 
# (for example gfx90a or gfx942) or leave it blank
sh ../script/cmake-ck-dev.sh  ../ <arch>
# Make the copy kernel executable
make copy_basic -j
```
This will result in an executable `build/bin/test_copy_basic`

## example
```
args:
          -m        input matrix rows. (default 64)
          -n        input matrix cols. (default 8)
          -id       warp to use for computation. (default 0)
          -v        validation flag to check device results. (default 1)
          -prec     datatype precision to use. (default fp16)
          -warmup   no. of warmup iterations. (default 50)
          -repeat   no. of iterations for kernel execution time. (default 100)
```

## CK Tile Architecture Components

> The CK Tile framework is built around four key architectural components that work together to define and execute GPU kernels:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CK Tile framework is built around four key architectural components that work together to define and execute GPU kernels: shape, policy, problem, and pipeline.
```

### **1. Shape**
Defines the **hierarchical tile structure** and **memory layout** of the kernel:

```cpp
using Shape = ck_tile::TileCopyShape<BlockWaves, BlockTile, WaveTile, Vector>;
```

**Components:**

> - **BlockWaves**: Number of concurrent warps per block (e.g., `seq<4, 1>` for 4 warps along M, 1 along N)

Reviewer: I remember that we were having a conversation about moving away from warps in favour of "wavefront" (or the general term, even). Do we want to change this here?

Author: https://github.com/ROCm/composable_kernel/pull/2582/commits/98ace232e10bcb8e05914880db4c0515c9dcfdf1

- **BlockTile**: Total elements processed by one block (e.g., `seq<512, 8>`)

> - **WaveTile**: Elements processed by one warp (e.g., `seq<32, 8>`)

Reviewer: So back to the wave v warp: here the term is "WaveTile" but we reference a warp.

I feel that regardless of what terminology we land on, we should be consistent throughout. So I would, personally, go with "wave" over "warp". But we can discuss

Author: https://github.com/ROCm/composable_kernel/pull/2582/commits/98ace232e10bcb8e05914880db4c0515c9dcfdf1

> - **Vector**: Elements processed by one thread (e.g., `seq<1, 4>` for 4 contiguous elements)

Reviewer 2: should it be ThreadTile for consistency?

Author: We can call it ThreadTile but I believe CK already refers to this term as Vector. It'd hard to skew away from that. 
@tenpercent What do you think?

Defines the **execution flow** and **memory movement patterns**:

```cpp
// Example pipeline stages:
// 1. DRAM → Registers (load_tile)
// 2. Registers → LDS (store_tile)
// 3. LDS → Registers (load_tile with distribution)
// 4. Registers → DRAM (store_tile)
```

**Purpose**: Defines the **sequence of operations** and **memory movement strategy**.

### **Component Interaction**

```cpp
// Complete kernel definition
using Shape   = ck_tile::TileCopyShape<BlockWaves, BlockTile, WaveTile, Vector>;
using Problem = ck_tile::TileCopyProblem<XDataType, Shape>;
using Policy  = ck_tile::TileCopyPolicy<Problem>;
using Kernel  = ck_tile::TileCopyKernel<Problem, Policy>;
```

**Flow:**
1. **Shape** defines the tile structure and work distribution
2. **Problem** combines data types with the shape
3. **Policy** defines memory access patterns for the problem
4. **Kernel** implements the actual computation using all components

### **Why This Architecture?**

#### **Separation of Concerns**
- **Shape**: Focuses on **work distribution** and **tile structure**
- **Problem**: Focuses on **data types** and **configuration**
- **Policy**: Focuses on **memory access** and **optimization**

> - **Pipeline**: Focuses on **execution flow** and **synchronization**

Reviewer 2: But in this example, pipeline is merged with kernel(s). Would it help to separate the `Kernel` logic and have 2 separate pipelines for execution flows with and without using LDS?

Author: I will add a note that we intentionally do not use pipeline in this example and build the kernel from Policy and Problem. 
For simplicity, Pipeline should be introduced in GEMM example.

```

### Encoding Parameters Explained

- **M0, M1, M2**: Hierarchical distribution along M dimension
  - M0: Number of wave iterations along M
  - M1: Number of waves along M  
  - M2: Number of threads per wave along M
- **N0, N1**: Distribution along N dimension
  - N0: Number of threads along N
  - N1: Vector size (elements per thread)
- **YIELD arguments**: Both `Repeat` and `Vector` because effective work per thread is `Vector * Repeat`

## Tensor Abstractions

### Tensor Descriptor
Defines the logical structure of a tensor:
```cpp
auto desc = make_naive_tensor_descriptor(
    make_tuple(M, N),           // tensor dimensions
    make_tuple(N, 1),           // strides
    number<Vector_N>{},         // vector length for vectorized access
    number<1>{}                 // stride in vectorized load
);
```

### Tensor View
Combines memory buffer with tensor descriptor:
```cpp
auto x_m_n = make_naive_tensor_view<address_space_enum::global>(
    p_x,                        // memory buffer
    make_tuple(M, N),           // dimensions
    make_tuple(N, 1),           // strides  
    number<S::Vector_N>{},      // vector length

>     number<1>{}                 // scalar per vector

Reviewer 2: in the code, it's referred to as guaranteed last dimension vector stride

Author: fixed

struct TileCopyKernel
{
    CK_TILE_DEVICE void operator()(const XDataType* p_x, XDataType* p_y, index_t M, index_t N) const
    {
        // 1. Create tensor views
        // 2. Create tile windows  
        // 3. Iterate over N dimension tiles
        // 4. Load, copy, and store data
    }
};
```

### Step-by-Step Execution

1. **Tensor View Creation**:
   ```cpp
   const auto x_m_n = make_naive_tensor_view<address_space_enum::global>(
       p_x, make_tuple(M, N), make_tuple(N, 1), number<S::Vector_N>{}, number<1>{});
   ```
   - Creates views for both input and output tensors
   - Specifies vectorized access with `Vector_N` elements per load

2. **Tile Window Creation**:
   ```cpp
   auto x_window = make_tile_window(x_m_n,
                                   make_tuple(number<S::Block_Tile_M>{}, number<S::Block_Tile_N>{}),
                                   {iM, 0},
                                   Policy::template MakeDRAMDistribution<Problem>());
   ```
   - Creates windows into specific tiles of the tensors
   - Each block processes one tile starting at `{iM, 0}`
   - Tile distribution determines how threads access data

3. **N-Dimension Iteration**:
   ```cpp

>    index_t num_n_tile_iteration = __builtin_amdgcn_readfirstlane(integer_divide_ceil(N, S::Block_Tile_N));

Reviewer 2: maybe it's worth adding a comment about this common pattern for saving a VGPR

Author: Sure.

Author: https://github.com/ROCm/composable_kernel/pull/2582/commits/ad6bdfad1adfda732dfdb6b6d5d5f0125fcd9bdf

// 2. Registers → LDS (store_tile)
// 3. LDS → Registers (load_tile with distribution)
// 4. Registers → DRAM (store_tile)
```

**Purpose**: Defines the **sequence of operations** and **memory movement strategy**.

### **Component Interaction**

```cpp
// Complete kernel definition
using Shape   = ck_tile::TileCopyShape<BlockWaves, BlockTile, WaveTile, Vector>;
using Problem = ck_tile::TileCopyProblem<XDataType, Shape>;
using Policy  = ck_tile::TileCopyPolicy<Problem>;
using Kernel  = ck_tile::TileCopyKernel<Problem, Policy>;
```

**Flow:**
1. **Shape** defines the tile structure and work distribution
2. **Problem** combines data types with the shape
3. **Policy** defines memory access patterns for the problem
4. **Kernel** implements the actual computation using all components

### **Why This Architecture?**

#### **Separation of Concerns**
- **Shape**: Focuses on **work distribution** and **tile structure**
- **Problem**: Focuses on **data types** and **configuration**
- **Policy**: Focuses on **memory access** and **optimization**
- **Pipeline**: Focuses on **execution flow** and **synchronization**

#### **Reusability**
- Same **Shape** can be used with different **Problems**

> - Same **Policy** can be applied to different **Shapes**

Reviewer 3: Same policy can be applied to different Problems

- **Pipelines** can be reused across different kernels

#### **Performance Optimization**
- **Shape** enables optimal work distribution
- **Policy** enables optimal memory access patterns
- **Pipeline** enables optimal execution flow

## Core Concepts

### Hierarchical Tile Structure

The CK Tile framework organizes work in a hierarchical manner:

> 1. **Vector**: Number of contiguous elements processed by a single thread

Reviewer 3: Can we call this ThreadTile, or is Vector the accepted nomenclature?

Reviewer 3: The reason I'm asking is the reader might be confused by vector loads, which actually means contiguous in-memory element loads. In a 2D thread-tile, this can only happen in 1 direction, not both. E.g., col major vs row-major.

Author: I agree with you. I've made this change. https://github.com/ROCm/composable_kernel/commit/f407f27d76f4ef4fb6f1dd85b6a3440072ac7de0

However, the current codebase does use Vector nomenclature, so in the future tutorials, I will  highlight that ThreadTile and vector can mean the same thing in the code.

   - Enables vectorized memory loads/stores.
   - Example: `Vector = seq<1, 4>` means each thread loads 4 contiguous elements along the N dimension
   - A Vector can be imagined as a thread-level tile

> 2. **WaveTile**: Number of elements covered by a single wave (64 threads on AMD)

Reviewer 3: Would mention 64 threads on CDNA archs and 32 threads on RDNA archs

Author: https://github.com/ROCm/composable_kernel/commit/f407f27d76f4ef4fb6f1dd85b6a3440072ac7de0
Done

   - Must satisfy: `Wave_Tile_M / Vector_M * Wave_Tile_N / Vector_N == WaveSize`
   - This ensures the number of threads needed equals the wave size
   - Example: `WaveTile = seq<64, 4>` with `Vector = seq<1, 4>` means:
     - Each thread handles 4 elements (Vector_N = 4)
     - Wave needs 64×4/4 = 64 threads to cover 64×4 = 256 elements
     - Total elements = 256, which requires WaveSize = 64 threads

3. **BlockTile**: Number of elements covered by one block (typically mapped to one CU)
   - Example: `BlockTile = seq<256, 64>` means each block processes 256×64 elements

4. **BlockWaves**: Number of concurrent waves active in a block

>    - Usually 4 waves per block on modern AMD GPUs

Reviewer 3: 4 waves per block is typical of some heavier workloads like GEMM, due to certain factors such as compute resources and constraints. It might be more general here to mention "up to 1024 threads, or 16 total waves" so the reader doesn't default to 4, but rather can adjust against their particular workload

Author: I added this note. https://github.com/ROCm/composable_kernel/commit/f407f27d76f4ef4fb6f1dd85b6a3440072ac7de0

In many scenarios, the total work (BlockTile) is larger than what the available waves can cover in a single iteration. This requires **wave repetition**:

```cpp
// Calculate how many times a wave needs to repeat to cover the entire block tile
static constexpr index_t WaveRepetitionPerBlock_M =
    Block_Tile_M / (Waves_Per_Block_M * Wave_Tile_M);
static constexpr index_t WaveRepetitionPerBlock_N =
    Block_Tile_N / (Waves_Per_Block_N * Wave_Tile_N);
```

**Key Insight**: When waves repeat, the effective work per thread becomes `Vector * Repeat`, not just `Vector`.

## Tile Distribution Encoding

The tile distribution encoding specifies how work is distributed across threads:

```cpp
constexpr auto outer_encoding =
    tile_distribution_encoding<sequence<1>, // replication
                               tuple<sequence<M0, M1, M2>, sequence<N0, N1>>, // hierarchy
                               tuple<sequence<1>, sequence<1, 2>>, // parallelism
                               tuple<sequence<1>, sequence<2, 0>>,  // paralleism
                               sequence<1, 2>, // yield
                               sequence<0, 1>>{}; // yield
```

### Encoding Parameters Explained

> 

Reviewer 3: Can we explain what replication = seq<1> means here?

Author: Honestly, I don't understand it enough at the moment to confidently write something about it. I plan to do some experiments in the copy kernel to learn about it.

- **M0, M1, M2**: Hierarchical distribution along M dimension
  - M0: Number of wave iterations along M
  - M1: Number of waves along M  
  - M2: Number of threads per wave along M

> - **N0, N1**: Distribution along N dimension

Reviewer 3: Might also be good to mention the importance of order here. The inner-most dimension seems it should be the fastest changing dimensions, which explains why N1 = VW = contiguous memory access. We can also make an insight where this indicates "row-major" data layout.

Author: Done. https://github.com/ROCm/composable_kernel/commit/a76128fbb9d52488059d35f95095dab54593d1f4
